cdc: make mq encoding protocol related more clear (#19156)
pingcap/docs: ticdc/ticdc-avro-protocol.md

# TiCDC Avro Protocol

> TiCDC Avro protocol is a third part implementation of the [Confluent Avro](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/fundamentals/serdes-develop/serdes-avro.html) data exchange protocol which is defined by [Confluent Platform](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/platform.html). Avro is a data format defined by [Apache Avro™](https://avro.apache.org/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiCDC Avro protocol is a third-party implementation of the [Confluent Avro](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/fundamentals/serdes-develop/serdes-avro.html) data exchange protocol defined by [Confluent Platform](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/platform.html). Avro is a data format defined by [Apache Avro™](https://avro.apache.org/)
```

This document describes how TiCDC implements the Confluent Avro protocol, and the interaction between Avro and [Confluent Schema Registry](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/index.html).

> **Warning:**
>
> Starting from v7.3.0, if you enable TiCDC to [replicate tables without a valid index](/ticdc/ticdc-manage-changefeed.md#replicate-tables-without-a-valid-index), TiCDC will report an error when you create a changefeed that uses the Avro protocol.

## Use Avro

The following is a configuration example using Avro:

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

```shell
cdc cli changefeed create --server=http://127.0.0.1:8300 --changefeed-id="kafka-avro" --sink-uri="kafka://127.0.0.1:9092/topic-name?protocol=avro" --schema-registry=http://127.0.0.1:8081 --config changefeed_config.toml
```

> The value of `--schema-registry` supports the `https` protocol and `username:password` authentication. The username and password must be URL-encoded. For example, `--schema-registry=https://username:password@schema-registry-uri.com`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The value of `--schema-registry` supports the `https` protocol and `username:password` authentication. The username and password must be URL-encoded. For example, `--schema-registry=https://username:password@schema-registry-uri.com`.
```

> The value of `--schema-registry` supports the `https` protocol and `username:password` authentication, for example, `--schema-registry=https://username:password@schema-registry-uri.com`. The username and password must be URL-encoded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value of `--schema-registry` supports the `https` protocol and `username:password` authentication. The username and password must be URL-encoded. For example, `--schema-registry=https://username:password@schema-registry-uri.com`.
```

> **Note：**
> 

> > When using the Avro protocol, one Kafka Topic can only have data for one table. You need to configure the [Topic dispatcher](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#topic-dispatchers) in the configuration file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> When using the Avro protocol, one Kafka topic can only contain data for one table. You need to configure the [Topic dispatcher](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#topic-dispatchers) in the configuration file. 
```

The data format of Value is the same as that of Key, by default. However, `fields` in the Value contains all columns, not just the primary key columns.

> **Note:**
>

> > The Avro protocol encodes DML events as follows: 
> > - For Delete events, only encodes the Key part. The Value part is empty. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The Avro protocol encodes DML events as follows: 
> 
> - For Delete events, only encodes the Key part. The Value part is empty. 
```

> The data format of Value is the same as that of Key, by default. However, `fields` in the Value contains all columns, not just the primary key columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data format of Value is the same as that of Key, by default. However, `fields` in the Value contains all columns.
```

Reviewer: 中文 PR 里删除了 “而不仅仅是主键列”

> **Note:**
>

> > The Avro protocol encodes DML events as follows: 
> > 
> > - For Delete events, only encodes the Key part. The Value part is empty. 
> > - For Insert events, encodes all column data to the Value part. 
> > - For Update events, encodes only all column data that is updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The Avro protocol encodes DML events as follows: 
> 
> - For Delete events, Avro only encodes the Key part. The Value part is empty. 
> - For Insert events, Avro encodes all column data to the Value part. 
> - For Update events, Avro encodes only all column data that is updated to the Value part.
```

Note that, even if a schema change passes the compatibility check and a new version is registered, the data producers and consumers still need to acquire the schema to support data encoding and decoding.

For more information about schemas, refer to [Schema Registry related documents](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/avro.html).

## Consumer implementation

TiCDC Avro protocol support decoding by the [`io.confluent.kafka.serializers.KafkaAvroDeserializer`](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/fundamentals/serdes-develop/serdes-avro.html#avro-deserializer).

The consumer program can acquire the schema by using [Schema Registry API](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/develop/api.html), which can be used to deserialize the TiCDC avro protocol encoded data.

> ### Distinguish event type
> 
> Consumer can distinguish DML event type by the following rule:
> 
> * If only have Key part, it is a Delete event.
> * If have both Key and Value part, it is a Insert or Update event. If enable the [TiDB extension fields](#tidb-extension-fields), use the `_tidb_op` field to know whether it is Insert or Update, else cannot distinguish these two.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Distinguish event types

The consumer program can distinguish DML event types by the following rules:

* If there is only the Key part, then it is a Delete event.
* If there are both Key and Value parts, then it is either an Insert or an Update event. If the [TiDB extension fields](#tidb-extension-fields) are enabled, you can use the `_tidb_op` field to identify whether it is Insert or Update.  If the TiDB extension fields are not enabled, you cannot distinguish them.
```

## DDL events and schema changes

Avro does not send DDL events and Watermark events to downstream. It checks whether a schema changes each time a DML event occurs. If a schema changes, Avro generates a new schema and registers it with the Schema Registry. If the schema change does not pass the compatibility check, the registration fails. TiCDC does not resolve any schema compatibility issues.

For example, the default [compatibility policy](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/fundamentals/schema-evolution.html#compatibility-types) of Confluent Schema Registry is `BACKWARD`, and you add a non-empty column to the source table. In this situation, Avro generates a new schema but fails to register it with Schema Registry due to compatibility issues. At this time, the changefeed enters an error state.

> Note that, even if a schema change passes the compatibility check and a new version is registered, the data producers and consumers still need to acquire the schema to support data encoding and decoding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that, even if a schema change passes the compatibility check and a new version is registered, the data producers and consumers still need to acquire the new schema for data encoding and decoding.
```

For more information about schemas, refer to [Schema Registry related documents](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/avro.html).

## Consumer implementation

The TiCDC Avro protocol can be deserialized by [`io.confluent.kafka.serializers.KafkaAvroDeserializer`](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/fundamentals/serdes-develop/serdes-avro.html#avro-deserializer).

> The consumer program can acquire the schema by using [Schema Registry API](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/develop/api.html), and then uses it to deserialize the data encoded by the TiCDC Avro protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The consumer program can acquire the latest schema via [Schema Registry API](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/develop/api.html), and then use the schema to deserialize the data encoded by the TiCDC Avro protocol.
```

### Distinguish event types

The consumer program can distinguish DML event types by the following rules:

> * If there is only the Key part, then it is a Delete event.
> * If there are both Key and Value parts, then it is either an Insert or an Update event. If the [TiDB extension fields](#tidb-extension-fields) are enabled, you can use the `_tidb_op` field to identify if it is an Insert or Update event. If the TiDB extension fields are not enabled, you cannot distinguish them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If there is only the Key part, it is a Delete event.
* If there are both Key and Value parts, it is either an Insert or an Update event. If the [TiDB extension fields](#tidb-extension-fields) are enabled, you can use the `_tidb_op` field to identify if it is an Insert or Update event. If the TiDB extension fields are not enabled, you cannot distinguish them.
```
